[GENTLE MUSIC]
[SOFT MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]
>>EDWARD GROUP: Of all
the elements known so far
to be essential to life
itself and human health,
iodine is the most misunderstood
and the most feared.
However, iodine is
the safest of all
the essential trace elements.
Yet medical professionals
and the public
have been led to
believe that it's
not necessary and even dangerous
to use as a supplement.
In this special four part
series of "Healing Matrix,"
iodine expert Dr.
David Brownstein
is here to set the
record straight
and to dispel the misinformation
continued by the health care
system.
But first, take a look
at a brief history
of the essential element.
[DRAMATIC PIANO MUSIC]
>> Bernard Courtois,
a French chemist,
discovered iodine in 1811.
And in the 1920s, it
made its medical debut
treating syphilis.
In fact, iodine has been
used for hundreds of years
to treat infections,
Graves' disease, and goiter.
In the early 20th
century, iodized salt
was introduced into
the household diet.
An iodine deficiency was
considered a thing of the past.
But is this really the case?
Over the last 40 years,
the rising incidents
of thyroid disorders,
autoimmune diseases, and cancer
correlates with
falling iodine levels.
So are we really
getting enough iodine?
Not only is iodine
necessary to sustain life,
but it may be the answer
for the growing epidemic
of chronic illnesses worldwide.
>>EDWARD: Welcome,
Dr. Brownstein,
to "Healing Matrix."
Tell us, what is iodine?
>>DAVID BROWNSTEIN: Well,
iodine's an essential element.
And as you started
your introduction
by saying it's the most
misunderstood nutrient, which
it is, it's an essential
element we can't live without.
>>EDWARD: Why is it so
important for people's health?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
every cell in the body
needs and requires
iodine to survive.
So if we don't have enough
iodine, we will literally die.
>>EDWARD: Where
do we find iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
iodine is found in salt,
refined salt. It's found in
seafood and ocean products.
But it's been in drastic
decline in our diets
over the last 40 to 50 years.
>>EDWARD: So dating back in
history, what has iodine been
used for, especially medically?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, in
the early 19th century,
iodine was the most
used item in medicine.
And it was primarily
used for infections,
which was the number
one killer at the time.
In the 20th century, iodine
was used for thyroid problems
and goiter.
And it was widely
used in medicine
until iodized salt became
in vogue in the mid-1920s.
Once iodine was added to salt,
the medical professionals
lost interest in
iodine, and everyone
was told the myth that
there's enough iodine in salt
they don't need anymore.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, so why
is it that doctors think
that we don't need iodine?
Why is it that people think that
we're not deficient in iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, number
one, doctors aren't taught
about iodine in medical school.
And we're basically taught that
there's enough iodine in salt
and the iodine deficiency
epidemic that was occurring
in the early 20th century was
resolved from iodized salt,
which it wasn't.
>>EDWARD: So what's changed
in the last hundred years
in the iodine story?
>>BROWNSTEIN: What's changed
is that our iodine levels have
been falling across the United
States over the last 50 years,
and they're down about
50% from where they were.
And at the same
time, our exposure
to toxic halides that inhibit
iodine use in the body
have gone up.
So it's kind of a double
whammy on the body.
We've had these toxic halides
lowering our iodine levels,
and we're getting lower
iodine from our food sources.
>>EDWARD: So you're
saying that you
can't get sufficient iodine in
salt. What happened with that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, in the
early 20th century when iodine
was added to salt, it did
cure the goiter epidemic,
and it was successful with that.
It was considered one of the
first public health miracles.
But it wasn't enough iodine
for the rest of the body.
And the rest of
the body has needs
for iodine, especially
the glandular tissue,
which includes the thyroid,
the ovaries, the uterus,
the breasts, the prostate,
and the pancreas.
And then when you couple it
with the growing toxicity
of fluoride and bromide that we
have this increasing exposure
to, it's made this iodine
deficiency epidemic worse.
>>EDWARD: Can you talk to
people about the goiter belt?
What is the goiter belt, and
has that changed over the years?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So in
the early 20th century,
there was an epidemic of goiter
in the midwestern United States
around the Great Lakes--
Michigan, Indiana,
Illinois, Ohio.
And then if you
draw a line straight
down the center of
the country, they
were suffering from it, too.
So it wasn't only people that
were suffering from goiter.
It was animals suffering from
thyroid problems and goiter.
And the animals weren't
growing to the right size.
And there was a worry that as
the human population expanded,
that we wouldn't be
able to feed them,
that the animal population
wouldn't sustain them.
So the government mandated
that iodine studies
be done in animals to see what's
the smallest amount of iodine
you could put in
the feed of animals
to prevent the thyroid and
goiter problems and procreation
problems the
animals were having.
And this was done
in Cleveland, Ohio.
And from those
studies, they estimated
how much iodine
humans would need
to prevent the same problems.
And therefore, they
put iodine in salt,
and they gave it to groups of
people in Ohio and Michigan
and studied them and found
that their goiter problems went
away.
And at that point,
the government
mandated that iodine
be put in salt.
And it was a successful public
health campaign to cure goiter.
But as I said, it
wasn't enough to give--
enough iodine for
the rest of the body.
>>EDWARD: So what have you
noticed over the years as far
as the toxic halogens
like bromide, fluoride--
where is that-- is iodine
being removed and being
replaced with some of
these toxic halogens?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So if we think
about the periodic table, which
we all learned in
high school, there
was a group called the halogens.
The halogens consist of
fluoride, bromide, iodine,
and chloride.
Two of those halogens
are essential.
We can't live without them.
That's iodine and chloride.
And two are toxic
and non-essential.
We don't need them, and we
shouldn't be exposed to them--
fluoride and bromide.
So the problem we've had
over the last 50 years
is that our exposure to
the toxic halogens fluoride
and bromide have gone way
up, particularly bromide.
Bromide is found in food.
It's found in soft drinks.
It's used as a fire retardant
in many consumer products.
We're probably sitting
on bromide right
now in this couch.
Fluoride, as we all know, has
been added to the water supply.
Fluoride is also found in
many pharmaceutical products
as a part of their
chemical makeup.
And as well as
bromide is found in
many pharmaceutical products.
So as our iodine levels have
been falling over the last 50
years, according to the
government's own National
Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey,
we've had this increasing
exposure to the toxic halides.
And that's caused our body to
lose more iodine because it's
called competitive
inhibition, where
if you get too much
of one toxic halide,
it'll cause the essential
halide to leave the body.
>>EDWARD: So most
people are probably
consuming a lot
of fluoride, a lot
of brominated toxic
compounds on a daily basis
in high, high levels and
don't even realize it.
What about finding
iodine in the soil?
I mean, is that a
good source of iodine?
Where can people
find iodine in foods?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So you can
really find iodine in seafoods.
It's not very high in the soil
from over farming and pesticide
use, but in seafood.
And that's one of the
reasons our iodine levels
have dropped over the
years, because our soil's
become so deficient of it.
But the problem with
seafood is if you
don't ingest that seafood within
a short time period of removing
it from the sea, the
iodine sublimates off
into a gaseous phase
and leaves the product.
>>EDWARD: Big situation
that we're dealing with
in today's society--
infertility, pregnancy.
How important is iodine before
pregnancy, during pregnancy,
and after pregnancy?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, iodine
has been studied in pregnancy
for over a hundred years now.
It is well known that
if pregnant moms are
deficient in iodine, that they
can have intelligence quotient
problems, IQ problems
in their babies.
And they can have attention
problems and a whole host
of endocrine problems
from thyroid problems
to breast problems
to ovarian problems.
And so it's crucial for
moms to be iodine sufficient
before they get pregnant.
It's crucial for moms to take
iodine while they're pregnant.
And it's crucial for
moms to take iodine
after they're pregnant.
Studies have clearly shown that
women who are iodine deficient
have lower IQ babies compared
to women who have enough iodine.
>>EDWARD: Now we're dealing
with an epidemic of ADD, ADHD.
And you've done
research on the benefits
of taking iodine or utilizing
iodine for children, not
only for ADHD, not only for ADD,
but also for mental stability,
brain growth, et cetera.
What do you see
in today's society
with children and
iodine deficiency?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
studies have clearly
shown in different
Western countries
that women who are
deficient in iodine
have significantly
higher risk of having
ADHD babies and older kids.
So their neurologic
system won't form normally
if they don't have
enough iodine.
So again, this needs to be
taken care of before women
become pregnant.
And unfortunately, from the
government's own studies,
again, referring to that
NHANES study, nearly 60%
of US women of pregnancy age are
iodine deficient, most of them
severely iodine deficient.
>>EDWARD: So when
a child is growing
and they're diagnosed with ADD,
ADHD and they're put on Ritalin
or they're put on some
pharmaceutical medication,
they're not addressing the
root cause of the situation.
They're just addressing
the symptoms.
And another big epidemic
is the hormonal imbalance.
So does iodine have an effect
on growth hormone for growing
adults or growing children?
And how is that balanced out?
And what have you
noticed over the years?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
first off, it's
known that iodine deficiency
can cause cretinism,
which is very short
individuals with decreased
mental abilities.
And there are still
areas of the world
where that occurs and
still areas of the US
where that occurs.
And as far as the ADHD Ritalin
example that you gave goes,
I don't think kids are having
a Ritalin deficiency epidemic.
I think they're having a
nutritional and hormonal
imbalance problem.
And iodine is one
of the things that's
leading the pack for that.
>>EDWARD: So how does iodine
actually impact the thyroid?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, we
can't make thyroid hormone
without iodine.
And all the thyroid
hormone molecules
have to have iodine
atoms attached to them.
So when you hear the term
T4 or T3, that 4 and 3 means
there's four iodine atoms
attached to thyroglobulin in T4
and three iodine
atoms attached in T3.
So if we don't
have enough iodine,
the thyroid gland
is going to suffer,
but all the glands
will suffer from that.
>>EDWARD: Dr.
Brownstein, how do you
test children that come
into your office for iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the best
way to test anyone for iodine
is urinary testing.
And you can do spot
testing where you just
collect a urine and spot test it
if someone's not taking iodine.
But once they're taking
iodine, the spot testing
becomes unreliable.
And then there becomes
a 24-hour iodine loading
test which has to be done.
>>EDWARD: You were one of
the pioneers with Dr. Abraham
and the iodine loading test.
Can you give us a little
bit of a background on that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So Dr.
Abraham had written a letter
to one of the journals that
I read that he developed
an iodine loading test.
And it was a little
two-paragraph letter
that he wrote.
And I called him
from that letter.
He became interested
in my practice
because I was in Michigan
in the goiter belt.
And he asked me if we want
to do a study together
where we could test the urine
of a couple hundred patients
and see where everybody's
iodine levels are.
So I flew out to California.
I met him.
We instantly formed
a good friendship.
And he taught me how to
do the laboratory work,
and we started
studying together.
And about four to six times
a year, I'd go to California
and work with him.
And all the time, I was
sending him samples of urine
for my patients.
And what we found
was that over 90%--
it was over 98%--
were low in iodine,
the vast majority
significantly low in iodine.
And so it was Dr. Abraham who
developed the iodine loading
test.
I had a little help.
I offered him a
little help with it.
But really, that was his idea.
And it's really the most
functional test for iodine
that's out there.
And the test is done where
you do a first morning urine
and get rid of it, and then you
take 50 milligrams of iodine
for an adult. And then you
collect 24 hours of urine
after that.
And you send a little
sample of urine in,
and we see how much the body
excretes of that 50 milligrams.
So you can just simply
subtract the numbers
and figure out how much
is the body hanging
onto from those 50 milligrams.
And what we found was
that for healthy people,
when they have iodine
sufficiency, about 95%
is excreted of 50 milligrams.
So 45 milligrams comes out, and
the body as a five milligram
pool that it utilizes every day.
Now keep in mind we don't
have stores of iodine.
So either we take it in
on a daily basis or we
become quickly deficient in it.
So that's how the
loading test was done.
And a loading test can
be done with children.
You just lower the
amount of iodine
you give them for their size.
But it's really the
most functional test
to determine whether iodine
deficiency is there or not.
>>EDWARD: You
brought up a point.
We don't have stores of iodine.
Would you say that
the body stores
the toxic halogens, fluoride-
and bromine-based compounds?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, we
were designed pretty well
by our maker.
And one of the things
we were designed to do
is keep toxic chemicals
from harming us.
So when the body
senses that something
is toxic like mercury
or bromide or fluoride,
it quickly binds it
up into the fat tissue
and tries to store
it away to keep it
from damaging ourselves.
The problem becomes that fat
tissue can become quickly
overwhelmed with
toxins, and then it
starts binding to other places,
such as nerve tissue or cells
or glands.
And that's where the
problems start to manifest.
But the problems were
manifesting well before that.
People just didn't know it.
So there are no iodine stores.
There are really no stores
of bromide and fluoride.
It's the body's
way of just trying
to sequester those items so
they don't harm the body.
>>EDWARD: Going back to the
children, I have a teenage son.
During puberty, how important
is it for children-- men,
girls and boys--
to be on an iodine supplement?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
this was elucidated
in the 1920s with the
salt studies with iodine.
And I'll get into that more
when we get to the salt episode.
But the study was
done in the 1920s
on iodine in prepubescent
girls and when they were
going through hormonal changes.
And the reason is
when boys and girls
go through hormonal changes,
their glandular tissue
starts to grow, particularly
breast tissue in girls,
and then the other
tissues grow as well.
So girls particularly
become iodine deficient
at puberty, more iodine
deficient at puberty
because they have more
breast tissue than boys.
So they can manifest it quicker.
>>EDWARD: So what
are your thoughts
on if someone was to
say, am I suffering
from an iron deficiency?
Can you name off
some common symptoms
that people can look for that
they might be experiencing
in their daily life right now?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, iodine
concentrates in the glandular
tissue of the body.
And it's concentrated
against a gradient.
So it's an energy
dependent process.
It's so important
that our body utilizes
its energy molecules,
ATP, to move it
into the glandular tissue.
So that includes the thyroid,
the ovaries, the uterus,
the breasts, the pancreas.
So iodine deficiency
will affect those tissues
in greater numbers.
So people who have
thyroid problems
can have iodine
deficiency, people
who have pancreatic
problems, ovarian problems,
uterine problems, prostate
problems, breast cancer,
fibrocystic breast
disease, thyroid cancer,
pancreatic cancer, ovarian,
uterine, prostate cancers
affecting one in three men.
I say all of this is
being driven in large part
from iodine deficiency.
>>EDWARD: I know one of the
things you talk about is cysts.
Can you elaborate on that?
I mean, ovarian, uterine cysts,
fibrocystic breast disease.
What's the relationship
between the cysts and iodine
deficiency?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So one of
iodine's main jobs in the body
is to maintain a normal
architecture of the glandular
tissue.
And that, again, includes
the thyroid, ovaries, uterus,
breasts, prostate, pancreas.
So if we call this normal
glandular tissue, it's normal.
It's the way it should be.
In iodine deficiency, the
first thing that happens
is you get cysts
in those tissues.
If it goes on longer, the
cysts become hard and nodular.
If it goes on
longer, they assume
the hyperplastic appearance
under a microscope,
which is a precursor to
cancer in those tissues.
Now this has been
shown in animal test
tube and human studies.
And the neat thing
about iodine is
that in animal test
tube and human studies,
iodine's been shown to reverse--
to stop this progression
and reverse it
wherever it catches it.
Iodine has what's called
antiapoptotic properties,
meaning it turns
cancer cells off
from rapidly dividing in
animal and test tube studies.
>>EDWARD: What would be the
standard medical treatment
for fibrocystic breast disease
or ovarian or uterine cysts?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
the standard treatment
is they'll tell them
to clean up their diet
and get caffeine
out of their diet.
Stop drinking alcohol.
And really, that's about it
for the standard treatment
for fibrocystic breast disease.
Conventional medicine doesn't
acknowledge why it exists,
and they really don't have
great treatments for it.
But I can tell you that iodine
is the most studied item
in fibrocystic breast
disease, and it
works in the vast majority
of women who take it.
>>EDWARD: We actually have a
patient of Dr. Brownstein's who
suffered from severe fibrocystic
breast disease for years.
Joining us on Skype is Mary Ann.
Welcome, Mary Ann.
Mary Ann, how long
have you suffered
from fibrocystic breast disease?
>>MARY ANN: I was
diagnosed with it
when I was 35 when I had
my very first mammogram.
And so I'm 62 right now.
So that was quite
a few years ago.
So I suffered with it
for quite a few years
before I told Dr.
Brownstein about it.
>>EDWARD: When you
say suffered with it,
can you give us an idea
of what you went through
on a daily basis?
>>MARY ANN: My breasts
were like two hard rocks.
I could barely touch them.
They were very, very painful.
I could barely do
a monthly self-exam
because I had no idea
what I was feeling.
And my mammograms were showing
that the cystic disease was
so severe that if there
was an underlying neoplasm,
the mammograms absolutely
could not detect it.
>>EDWARD: What were you
getting as a treatment program
from your standard
allopathic physicians?
>>MARY ANN: I was told to use
some vitamin E at that time,
like 400 to 800 units of vitamin
E at that time, which I did.
And I was also told to cut down
on my caffeine intake, which
I did, which really never
was that much to begin with.
And then I was involved
in numerous biopsies,
I mean, numerous ones.
And thankfully, they
were all negative.
But my surgeon back
then even told me
that someday I would probably
have to have a mastectomy,
and he was actually making
my incisions to accommodate
that surgery someday.
>>EDWARD: So you even
considered a double mastectomy.
>>MARY ANN: I did because
I felt terrified every day.
I never knew what was
going on with my breasts
because nothing could detect it.
>>EDWARD: Wow.
Dr. Brownstein,
you tested Mary Ann
when she came in to see you.
What were your findings?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, when
I first saw Mary Ann--
I remember the story, Mary Ann--
she was a little bit tearful.
And she was seeing a fibrocystic
breast disease specialist
at the University of Michigan.
And he was trying to
convince her to do surgery
and to have a
bilateral mastectomy.
And she came to me
saying that she's
pretty much at that point.
And I said to her, have
you ever taken iodine?
And she's didn't know
anything about it.
Now Mary Ann's a very
smart registered nurse.
And she didn't know
anything about it.
So I explained to her the
whole iodine glandular issue.
And I said to her, I've treated
many, many women over the years
with iodine for
fibrocystic breast disease.
And I told her it was
the most studied item
in fibrocystic breast
disease around the world.
And the success rate of
using iodine to treat
fibrocystic breast disease
is around the 80% mark.
So I asked her to not
consider any surgery
for a couple of months and
give me at least two months
and see how it goes.
And I did an iodine
loading test on her.
She was incredibly
low in iodine.
And we did a Therma-Scan
as a baseline
at the beginning, which measures
the heat off the breasts, which
gave a very poor rating for her.
And I placed her on iodine.
And I used a few other
things as whatever
I found deficient, some
other vitamins and minerals.
But we quickly went up to a
high dose of iodine in her,
started at 50 milligrams
and went up to 100.
And Mary Ann called me about
two weeks into that therapy
and said they're
already feeling better.
Do you remember that, Mary Ann?
>>MARY ANN: Yes, I do.
Yes, I do.
It was absolutely astounding.
And then when I went back to
the University of Michigan
for a scheduled biopsy,
they could not find the spot
that they were going to biopsy.
It was completely gone.
>>EDWARD: So that was after,
what, one month of treatment?
>>MARY ANN: Yes.
>>EDWARD: That's
pretty miraculous.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Now one
other thing with Mary Ann.
When I first saw Mary Ann, I did
a breast exam the first visit.
Her breasts felt like
foreign objects on her chest.
They were hard and nodular.
And the only thing I can
describe that feeling to,
it was like when I took
karate in my younger years
and the punching bag-- was
that hard, rubbery thing.
And she was very sore, and
she wouldn't tolerate any even
mild touch to her breasts.
And when I saw her back for a
recheck visit around six weeks,
her breasts were at least
50% better, if not more.
And at that point, I
knew she was on her way.
>>EDWARD: What kind of dosage
of iodine did Mary Ann take?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I put her
on a little higher dose.
So my average dose for most
people is 25 milligrams
in our toxic world,
maybe 50 milligrams.
But people who have
glandular disorders
or significant problems
that iodine might help,
they generally need more.
So I put her on a
little bit more.
And then over the years
as she's stabilized,
we've been able
to lower her down.
But she needs a consistent
amount of iodine,
as we found out about
a year and a half,
two years into treatment when
she calls me up out of the blue
and said, it's not
working anymore.
And I said, what do you
mean it's not working?
And she said, my pain's back.
Do you remember that
phone call, Mary Ann?
>>MARY ANN: I do.
I got a little lax
with my Iodoral.
And I got it back.
>>BROWNSTEIN: I said
to Mary Ann, that's
unusual for breast cysts to come
back if you're taking iodine.
Are you taking it?
And there was a long
pause on her end,
and she said, oops, I
think I forgot to take it
the last three or four weeks.
And she went back on it.
I talked to her a
couple of weeks later,
and she said everything was
fine and back to normal.
>>EDWARD: Well, that's an
incredible story, Mary Ann.
And thank you so much for coming
on and sharing your story.
I hope that that just gives
a lot of hope and faith
to all the listeners and all
the people watching and all
the women out there
that are suffering
from fibrocystic breast disease.
Thanks for coming on.
>>MARY ANN: Thank you.
>>EDWARD: Dr. Brownstein,
if iodine deficiency
is so rampant, why
is this not being
taught in medical schools?
>>BROWNSTEIN:
Well, there's a lot
of things not being taught
in medical schools that
should be taught.
But this is certainly
one of them.
And it's a disaster.
And I see medical students.
I see residents.
They come in my office
for a period of time.
I ask them all about iodine.
The only thing they've
learned about iodine
is what I learned
in medical school,
that iodized salt was one of the
greatest public health miracles
and the iodine deficiency
epidemic was cured
from iodized salt in the 1920s.
And that's simply not true.
And the government's own
NHANES study proved that.
And over the last
40 to 50 years,
iodine levels have
fallen nearly-- over 50%
across the United States.
>>EDWARD: So how
detrimental would this
be to the
pharmaceutical industry
if the iodine revolution really
takes hold and people start
understanding and doctors start
understanding and prescribing
iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the
pharmaceutical industry
does not want to know
about this and does not
want people to know about this.
Because if they get healthy,
they won't need their drugs.
And iodine deficiency can affect
so many areas of the body,
from the thyroid to the brain
to all the glandular tissue
to the muscles, which has a high
iodine concentration, that it
could really tone down how much
people are buying prescription
items.
So they don't want this
information out there.
>>EDWARD: Some of
these simple things
that just could have such a
huge impact on our health care
system and reduce
health care costs.
And that's one of the biggest
things we're spending money on.
I knew iodine is a big
supplement that could do that.
And it's just
amazing that we have
to live every single day with
knowing the root cause of all
these situations
and these problems
that people are
suffering from and then
watching the allopathic
medical industry treat
the symptoms of disease
instead of the root cause.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Look, I was
trained in that model.
I bought into that
model in my training.
And if you think about how drugs
work, probably 99% of drugs
work by either poisoning
enzymes or blocking receptors
in the body.
Now I don't think we were
designed by our maker
to have our enzymes
poisoned and our receptors
blocked for the long term.
Now there's a time and a
place to do those things,
such as an acute heart
attack or an acute stroke.
I would say you should
be in the nearest
ER that's skilled with
taking care of those.
And the drug therapies
can save your life.
But for chronic care, those
things are not the way to go
and for promoting health.
It's not a good idea to
poison things and block
things in the body.
So iodine is just
one of many things
that holistically
can help people
achieve their optimal health.
>>EDWARD: There's a
lot of information
out there on iodine and thyroid.
Most people just
automatically assume
iodine's for the thyroid.
But iodine has been shown--
and you've noticed this and
you've talked about this--
to detoxify the body as well.
Can you tell us about
the detoxification method
or what you've
noticed that iodine
can detox in someone's body?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So we mentioned
it earlier with the halides,
and it's called competitive
inhibition, where
one of the halides
can competitively
inhibit another one,
bind to its receptors,
and since the body has no
stores of these things,
it will just release
whatever it is.
So in the case of iodine,
if we get too much bromide
or fluoride, the body will
release iodine and bind
too much bromide and fluoride.
That's not a good thing.
And vice versa, if
we get enough iodine,
the body can release the
bromide and fluoride.
But iodine has also been
shown to help detoxify mercury
and aluminum and lead.
And I've done the
measurements on that,
and I've reported
that in my book.
So iodine should be part of
any detoxification regimen.
>>EDWARD: Do you
notice anyone going
through any of the signs
of Herxheimer reaction
or any detox reactions when
they start taking iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Sure.
That's one of the things
you need to avoid.
So if someone
hasn't taken iodine
and they're severely
iodine deficient,
you can bet your
money that they're
bromide and fluoride toxic.
So when they start
taking iodine,
this bromide and fluoride
gets moved around
and can get released
in the body.
Now if they're not
functioning well,
that can cause a
lot of problems,
and that's what's referred to
as the old Herxheimer reaction.
So one of the ways
to avoid that is
to take salt with the iodine.
And salt in the
early 20th century
was one of the ways to
cure bromide toxicity
because bromide was used in a
lot of medications back then,
such as Bromo-Seltzer
and some other things.
Now bromide is still
used in medications today
but not as much.
But doctors, when there
was bromide toxicity,
would give them IVs of
sodium chloride or salt.
We don't have to
do IVs for this.
We can take it orally.
And most people are
salt deficient as well,
which we'll touch on
in the salt segment.
But about a teaspoon
of unrefined salt a day
when you're taking iodine
will minimize the chance
of having a Herxheimer
reaction along with maintaining
adequate hydration.
>>EDWARD: I'm glad you mentioned
your book, Dr. Brownstein.
It's one of my favorite books.
"Iodine-- Why You Need It, Why
You Can't Live Without It"--
this is an incredible book
that everybody should read.
Not only does it go into
the details about iodine,
but it goes into the
symptoms, the conditions.
It's an easy-to-read book.
It's very, very informative.
So I highly recommend you
get that book, "Iodine--
Why You Need It and Why
You Can't Live Without It."
It's a perfect title for that--
>>BROWNSTEIN: Thank you--
>>EDWARD: --book as well.
So we've been touching
a lot on iodine.
What is the difference
between iodine and iodide?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So the
difference is solely
whether there's an
extra electron attached
to that molecule-- atom or not.
So iodine is the
oxidized form of iodide.
It's lacking an extra electron.
And iodide has a full
complement of electrons
in its outer shell.
So those are fancy terms.
And I don't think
people necessarily
need to understand that.
What they need to understand is
if they're going to use iodine
for any condition, it is best
to use a combination of iodine
and iodide because they have
different effects on the body.
For example, iodine has been
shown to treat infections.
There's no organism
that's been shown
to be resistant to iodine.
Therefore, it's used as
Betadine and pre-surgically
to clean off the skin.
Iodide, on the other
hand, binds to the thyroid
and the stomach and some other
tissues and is needed there.
The breasts binds iodine.
So to get the best
whole body results,
you want to use a combination
of iodine and iodide.
And I can tell you from
personal experience, when
I tried one form or the
other, the combination
works much better.
>>EDWARD: OK, so what is the
difference in your opinion
and experience between nascent
iodine and Lugol's solution?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So Dr. Lugol
developed Lugol's solution
in the 1800s.
And it's a 5%
iodine solution that
was used as the most used
medical item until the 1920s
and, as I mentioned before, was
used to treat infection, which
was the number one killer before
antibiotics became in vogue
or were developed.
Nascent iodine has different
forms of iodine in it.
The problem I find with
that form of iodine
is that it's just
not strong enough
in our world we live in today.
Our exposure to
bromide and fluoride
have gone through the roof.
Therefore, our
iodine requirements
are higher compared
to our predecessors,
compared to our parents
and our grandparents
and our great grandparents.
When you couple that with
falling iodine levels
across the US, we've got a
double whammy with iodine.
It's created the perfect
storm for all these patients
suffering with thyroid,
breast, ovary, uterus, prostate
problems, pancreatic problems.
And I think we need to use
larger doses than what's
in the smaller doses of iodine.
>>EDWARD: Have you ever had a
case where you've had someone
take too much iodine and seen
any negative effects of, like,
overdosing on iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, sure.
You could take too
much of anything.
You can drink too much
water and cause problems.
But taking too much iodine
is rare, but it does happen.
It's particularly
problematic if someone
has a autonomously functioning
nodule in their thyroid.
What that means is they've got
a little growth in their thyroid
that's lost control.
So when you give iodine,
that little growth
will start producing a
lot of thyroid hormone,
and it'll quickly create
a thyrotoxic environment.
So people can get nervous,
jittery palpitations.
Now it's very rare.
I've only had a couple
of cases over 20 years.
But it does occur.
Unfortunately, the
way it's picked up
is someone takes iodine,
and they get hyper.
It is cured by not
taking iodine and getting
that nodule removed.
But there's very few people
who have allergies to iodine.
Iodine's very safe for the
vast majority of people.
>>EDWARD: If anyone
watching says,
hey, I want to start
on iodine tomorrow,
what would you recommend a
starting dose and a maintenance
dose?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the
best thing they could do
is work with a iodine literate
and knowledgeable doctor.
So that's what I
would recommend.
If they want to start it on
their own, I would start slow.
Just pay attention to
how you're feeling.
My average doses for my
patients is 25 milligrams
if they're healthy, more if
they have glandular disease.
And it's best to
work with someone,
though, who can follow you.
>>EDWARD: I think
relatively it's pretty safe.
I haven't heard
too much of anybody
having any type of severe
reactions to iodine.
>>BROWNSTEIN: We have five
practitioners in our office.
We've been using it since 2000.
We have very rare side
effects with iodine.
But there could be side
effects with vitamin C. There
can be side effects with water.
It's just very rare.
This is less than
a patient a year
that has a problem with it.
>>EDWARD: So what do you say
to all the people that come in
and say, I have a shellfish
allergy, I can't take iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So a
shellfish allergy
does not guarantee you have
an iodine allergy problem.
You may.
But I've treated lots of
patients with shellfish allergy
with iodine, and
they've done fine.
Some can't.
But, again, a true iodine
allergy is very rare.
But we've actually been
able to treat iodine allergy
in a lot of patients using the
acupressure technique, NAET.
>>EDWARD: Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that's a really
good technique.
What about radioactive iodine?
What's the difference
between a good usable
form of iodine
versus what they're
using to treat some thyroid
cancers, radioactive iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So what you
and I have been talking about
is inorganic, non-radioactive
iodine and iodide together.
That's contrasted with
radioactive iodine, which
is used in medicine to
treat areas of the body,
such as a thyroid,
which takes up iodine.
So if you have thyroid
cancer, the idea
is you give radioactive
iodine, which
is taken up by the thyroid,
and the radioactivity
destroys the cancer.
The problem is that
radioactive iodine is taken up
whatever iodine's
taken up, coating
the breasts, the ovaries,
the uterus, the pancreas,
the prostate.
Not only does it destroy
tissue in those areas,
but it alters the DNA.
That's why studies have
shown an increased cancer
rate in those treated with
radioactive iodine years
down the road.
I do not recommend radioactive
iodine for thyroid cancer.
If someone has thyroid cancer,
I recommend having surgery
before radioactive
iodine so you don't
damage the rest of the body.
>>EDWARD: Well, you can use
the usable form of iodine
to eliminate and detoxify the
radioactive iodine, correct?
>>BROWNSTEIN: That
is totally correct.
>>EDWARD: Dr. Brownstein,
what is medical iota phobia?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
medical iota phobia
is the unwarranted fear
of using and recommending
doses of iodine use from
previous generations
of clinicians that
have shown to be
safe and effective for
treating the symptoms
and signs of iodine deficiency.
Dr. Abraham developed that term.
And it's a wonderful term.
And it's from people
that are generally
ignorant about iodine literature
and don't know how to use it.
And they're afraid of using it.
So medical iota phobia
unfortunately is rampant today.
One of the reasons
I wrote my book
was to help cure
medical iota phobia.
>>EDWARD: OK, so where can
people go to learn more
about you, learn more
about your treatments,
learn more about iodine?
And I know you have many other
books that you've written.
Because one thing
I love about you
is it is a holistic
treatment program.
And everybody is different,
and everybody really
needs a custom holistic
treatment program.
So where can someone find out
more information about you?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
they go to my website,
which is www.drbrownstein.com.
And I've written 15 books, and
I only write about what works.
When I see it work in the
vast majority of people,
I become interested
in it, especially
since I wasn't taught
most of the stuff
or any of the stuff
in medical school.
And I want to help educate my
patients and others out there
to not have to suffer
with their illnesses
and to take charge
of their situation
and educate themselves.
And then they can make
better health care decisions.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, you said it.
The true definition of a doctor
is a teacher, not a prescriber.
And that's so important to
educate people these days.
Thank you for joining us
today, Dr. Brownstein.
We have so much more
ground to cover.
In the next three
episodes, we'll
talk about the role of iodine in
the thyroid, glandular cancer,
and the importance of mineral
salt. Part of our mission
is to dispel the flawed
information concerning iodine
and to correct the
medical literature that's
been misinforming individuals
and medical professionals
for decades.
Join us on the next episode
of this special four part
series with Dr. David
Brownstein in which we will
discuss iodine and the thyroid.
I'm Dr. Edward Group.
Thank you for watching
"Healing Matrix."
[GENTLE MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]